In this video we are going to talk about
global optimality of agent decisions.
And also about how to express
such a degree of optimality,
in a convenient mathematical form.
Recall that our ultimate goal,
as I have said previously is
to find an optimal clause.
There are many different ways to do so,
and today we will cover
one of the most fundamental method,
the dynamic programming.
What is the dynamic programming?
This is a method of solving complex
problem in a step-by-step fashion.
At first, break the problem
into a set of small pieces.
And second,
an iterative process is launched.
That is until no more of
unsolved pieces remain.
Solve at next piece reusing all
the results of already solved pieces.
This dynamic programming
approach lies at the very heart
of the reinforcement learning and thus
it is essential to deeply understand it.
Before we delve into the dynamic
programming approach,
let us first concentrate on the measure
of agents behavior optimality.
Such a measure is absolutely
required to build an optimal policy.
Getting single there right measure
of optimality of an agent actions.
Well, in fact we have already
seen the possible one,
the cumulative discounted reward,
which is also called the return.
Maybe this is the right measure of
global optimality of agent decisions.
Can we say that it is the sum
of discounted rewards if
the largest possible from any time t
onward than the agent acts optimal?
Well, almost yes.
There is one interesting peculiarity
of the return, it is random.
In fact, the return may be random
because of both poles randomness and
also because the environment
itself could be random.
Then if the agent can choose actions
by sampling them from say dependent
distribution.
And environment can also
react with different work and
next state given the same state and
action.
Thus the question arises,
how should one maximize the return,
which is a random variable,
how to handle this randomness?
One of the most innovative
approaches of accounting for
randomness is by the means
of taking an expectation.
This approach of taking an expectation
of return is still used in
reinforcement learning.
And corresponds to the notion
of value function.
Value function, v(s),
is also called state value function
because it depends only
on the current state.
The intuition is as follows.
The value function is a mean reward that
agent could get out from the environment,
starting from state s and
following policy pi onward.
The value function, as you may have
guessed, is defined simply as an expected
return, conditioned on the state
an agent currently stands in.
That is, S sub t.
That is expressed in the first
line of the formula in this slide.
This formula is a decomposition
of the value function,
which you will encounter many
times during the course.
Now, we are to go through
this formula line by line.
It's interesting that this
expectation is meant to be over
both policy stochasticity and
environment stochasticity and
over all timed steps from time
t to the very end of the.
Taking the expectation with respect
to the randomness in each and
every state doesn't seem very practical.
So we proceed with the second
line of the formula,
which composes the return under
an expectation into the sum of two terms.
The immediate reward, Error sub t,
and the future discounted return
from the next state which is
denoted by gamma times G sub t + 1.
In fact,
we can write the expectation over both
sources of firmness in an explicit manner.
And this is precisely what is going
on in the third line of the formula.
Additionally, know that on that line,
we have
pushed the expectation with respect to all
future randomness inside the outer sums.
This expectation is highlighted
in green on the slide.
Now, know that this expectation
is by definition nothing but
the value function of the next state,
s prime.
This reference is written explicitly
on the last line of the formula.
Now please make sure that everything
from this line is clear to you
because this reference is ubiquitous
in reinforcement learning.
The decomposition of the value function on
the immediate to work and discounted value
of the next state, the last line,
is a singular going to heavily reliable.
This decomposition is so
important that it owns a name.
It is called the Bellman expectation
equation for value function.
So to reiterate, for computing the right
hand side of Bellman expectation equation,
we should average the reward
plus the discounted next value,
over all combinations of actions,
rewards, and next state.
Weighted by the probabilities of VR curry.
We can also think about combination
of value expectation equation
as about propagating values into tree.
This tree is known in reinforcement
learning literature as backup tree, or
backup diagram.
The backup diagram consists of all
possible combinations of action selection
and environment reaction
to the selected action.
In the root of the tree,
there is a state s for
which we want to compute
the value function.
In that root node an agent could
choose among different actions,
which are represented as filled blue
circles on the second level of the tree.
Once the action is selected
the environment takes its turn.
On each action made in the root state
an environment could react with the reward
and a transition to the next state.
This possible next state are denoted
these field green circles
at the bottom level of the backup tree.
Each arc in this tree diagram is
associated with its own probability.
Step level of the tree
corresponds to action selection.
So the top level arcs are associated with
probabilities assigned to actions by our
policy pi.
The bottom level arcs, on the other hand,
corresponds to the probabilities
of reworking and
transitioning to the next state.
These probabilities are known
as environment dynamics.
To compute the value of the state s
in the root, according to the formula
on the slide, we need to average reward
and discounted values in that state, or
all possible combinations of action
selection and environment reaction.
This diversion could be represented as
the backing up the value from the leaves,
to the root of the tree.
That is, we start from the leaves, in each
leaf we compute the value of that state,
of the next state as prior.
And then we propagate the computed
values back up to the root.
Once the value exits the state note
it gets multiplied by the discount
factor of gamma and
once the value ascends the particular arc,
it gets multiplied by the probability
associated with this arc.
Additionally, in each node in this tree,
all the values incoming through arcs
are summed and further propagated
up to the root of the tree.
You need to know this diagram is
nothing but visual representation
of the computation process performed
by the Bellman expectation equation.
However, such a visual queue
may be useful to understand and
contrast methods with each other.
Another crucial concept in
the reenforcement learning literature
is action value function, q.
Which is a function of two arguments,
state s and action a.
Action value function is defined similarly
to the state value function, but
with an interesting twist.
It is defined as expectation of return
conditional on state and action.
That is a single but
very important distinction.
The intuition of the state
action value function,
which is also called q
function is as follows.
The q function is the mean reward that
agent could get out from environment.
After making action a instead s and
subsequently following policy pi.
Please note that action a,
that is argument of q function,
is not connected with policy pi.
The policy pi could have even zero
probability of selection action
a instead of s.
But this by no means restricts us from
being able to relate value
of action a instead of s.
The formula and its recursive form,
is very similar to those
of the value function.
One important difference exists, though.
When computing q function,
one is free of policy stochasticity
in the first action selection step.
Equivalently, we don't have the sum
over all possible initial actions.
Because the first action we know for
sure is equal to the argument
of the q function.
Otherwise, the regards to the definition
of q function is precisely the same as for
the value function.
For deep understanding of
reenforcement learning,
it is really necessary to get acquainted
with value and action value functions.
More to say, we'll require to re-express
one function in terms of another.
Thus let us first make sure
we understand how to do this.
For now, we already know
how to write the q function
recursively in terms of v function.
The formula stems from direct
decomposition of q function
into immediate work, and
value of the next state.
To help understanding that this
dependence of q function on the value
of the next state is written from
the previous slide as the first formula.
But what if you want to write v
function in terms of q function?
That is, what if you want to
express the value of state
in terms of action values of the state.
Well, in fact, this is pretty easy.
If you recall the definition of v and
q functions, you'll notice
that V function is nothing but
an expectation of action value function
with respect to policy probabilities.
That observation is highlighted in green
in the second formula on the slide.
This observation gives us the means to
write q function of current state and
action in terms of q function of
the next state and next actions.
This dependence is made explicit
as the last formula on the slide.
Meanwhile the dependence of q function
on q function of the next state,
can be also visualized with back up tree.
That is precisely what
we are going to do next.
At the top of the slide, there is
a formula that expresses a q function,
in terms of q functions of
the next state and actions.
This diagram looks strikingly similar to
the previously discussed backup tree for
value function computation.
However, unlike the previous
backup diagram, this diagram for
q function has a different root.
It is no longer a state but
actually pair of state and action.
That is the arguments of q function.
The top level arcs of the tree
now are also changed.
For computation of q(s,a),
the top level arches are the environment
reactions to the action a instead s.
That is environment reacts with
the reward r and the next state s prime,
and it reacts on the action
a made instead s.
In the next state s prime, however,
many different actions are possible and
probabilities of that actions are
associated with arcs on the bottom level.
The computational part,
however, hasn't changed.
As before we start from the very bottom
of the tree, compute the action value of
the leaves, multiply the values by the arc
probabilities of corresponding actions.
Then sum all the incoming values
in an intermediate green note
corresponding to the next state, as prior.
And multiplying the sum by the gamma.
Then the same process is done on the top
level, with probabilities of actions,
replaced by the probabilities
of the environment dynamics.
So for now, we have already
discussed many different topics.
We know what is return, and
why the return is a meaningful
measure of policy performance.
We also know that Bellman
expectation equations
allow to actively asses
the policy quality.
They do so by recursive computation of
failure and action value functions.
However, our ultimate goal still
is to find an optimal policy.
We want to know how to optimally
act in each and every state.
To figure this out,
however, we should first decide on how
to compare policies with each other.
That's precisely what we
are going to do next.
[MUSIC]